---
title: "Lessons Learned from CCDC: Year 1"
date: 2024-05-20 12:00:00 +0000
categories: [Competitions]
tags: [CCDC]
description: ""
---

## Introduction

This past year I've had the amazing opportunity to be an alternate for Brigham Young University's Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition Team. I competed in 5 invitationals, the wildcard event, and red teamed for an invitational that was [hosted by one of BYU's capstone teams](https://capstone.byu.edu/0000019d-4b2e-de89-a59d-7b6ed5a60000/2025-2026-capstone-design-fair-booklet-pdf).

I wrote this article to share a few tips that I've learned, reflect on my experience this year, and motivate others that are interested in cyber! Although I plan on writing more technical articles in the future, this one is more beginner-friendly.

## What is CCDC?

[The Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition (CCDC)](https://www.rtx.com/raytheon/who-we-are/nccdc) is where a group of 8 students are given an enterprise network of vulnerable computers. They must defend, fix, and maintain business operations while a team of security professionals attempts to break into that network and disrupt their systems. They are also tasked with completing additional, technical business assignments during the span of the competition.

During the season, there are various invitationals that last about 6-8 hours each. At the end of the year, there are regional competitions that go for 2 days long. The winners of each region go on to compete in a [national competition](https://www.nationalccdc.org/about.html) that also lasts 2 days, going up against world-class experts in offensive security (who spend their whole year planning on how to absolutely pummel some college kids).

## Background

In August of 2025, I returned home from a 2-year-long LDS mission. The three weeks I had at home before starting up college were especially rough. I had to adjust back to being a normal person, and I had a lot of spare time to ponder what I was going to do with my life. I tried to do some [Advent of Code](https://adventofcode.com/) problems from 2024 to brush off some old skills, because my exposure to technology was limited to a locked-down Android phone shared between my companion and I for the majority of my mission. Learning about AI was very shocking to me.

The day after I got home, I cold-emailed a long list of professors that I saw online had computing-related labs at BYU, looking for a job. Out of those that responded, most of them didn't have positions open for a student that hadn't started their freshman year yet. However, two of them said they wanted to talk with me. I met with one of them and he said that what he was looking for was out of my depth.

The other professor also invited me to meet with him, during the first week or so of school. When I entered the room he specified at the agreed-upon time, to my surprise, I found a group of students waiting there as well. What I didn't know then was that they were the upper-echelon of seniors in the cybersecurity program, aka the CCDC team. But to me they just seemed like a happy group of cool individuals. The professor had me sit in on their meeting and explained to me that he had a few projects for me, one of them being assisting with the CCDC team's infrastructure. At one point in the meeting, I accidentally said something in Spanish out of reflex. I hoped that nobody noticed but I think they were just nice enough to ignore it.

>Communication is key, amigo! 
{: .prompt-danger}

They added me to the Discord server for correspondence and got (maybe a little too excited) about setting my permissions so that I could help out while not knowing too much about the tryouts they were about to host. I attended the following info sessions that they held to prepare people for their tryouts, with the first one housing over 50 interested students! However, with each subsequent session, the number of attendees dwindled.

In the last info session, one of the team members encouraged me to try out for the team. I wasn't sure about it, but decided to give it a shot. I spent the week leading up to the tryout learning as much as I could about CCDC and trying to remember Linux commands that I learned in high school. Fortunately for me, only 12 or so people ended up staying through all the info sessions and making it to tryouts.

For the tryouts, we were given a Linux machine, a Windows machine, and a firewall. I spent the whole time on the Linux machine because that's all I knew how to operate. Red team locked me out of my Windows machine and logged into my firewall with default credentials, shutting down the majority of my services.

Even though it felt like a struggle, I ended up getting fourth place in service uptime and eighth in business injects! Apparently, it was enough to receive an invite for the team. I felt like [Master Crane in his origin story](https://kungfupanda.fandom.com/wiki/Crane) (ifyky). Between the time of the first info session and the tryouts, one original CCDC team member ended up not being able to compete, and I have a sneaking suspicion that that was what let me squeeze my way onto the roster. I felt like a bitcoin bought early.

## Lessons Learned

#### 1. Character

Although my technical abilities skyrocketed while studying among such great peers, the most valuable thing that I learned from them was the importance of character. Being willing and humble enough to dedicate time and energy trumps any previous experience any competitor has. Just showing up to tryouts put me in the top 25% of students that had expressed interest for the team.

CCDC is a hard competition. Some teams walk out halfway through a competition due to the disarray of their system, or even worse, the disarray of their team. The first few competitions I felt like dead weight. Trying to remove a malicious actor from the screen in front of you can feel like trying to hold water in your bare hands. This sentiment was eloquently expressed by a competitor to a red teamer in one of the debriefs we attended:

>"When did you delete my will to live?"

Understanding the modern operating system is nothing short of witchcraft. One must traverse the culmination of the greatest minds and wealthiest enterprises. Each piece is one layer of abstraction further from tangible reality. Among the convoluted mechanics is an opponent that practically lives in such systems.

But when push comes to shove, the experience and knowledge gained from competing is incomparable. If you stick with it and do the best that you can, you'll become the person you've dreamed of becoming. Unless you dream of becoming Edward Snowden. That ship has sailed.

The best piece of advice I can give is that you can feel out of your depth but you should never feel out of place.

#### 2. Walk Before You Run

["For how \[secureth\] a \[CCDC competitor\] the \[service\] whom he \[or she\] has not served, and who is a stranger unto him \[or her\] and is far from the thoughts and intents of his \[or her\] heart?"](https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/scriptures/bofm/mosiah/5?lang=eng&id=p13#p13)

No person goes straight into becoming a security professional without learning underlying disciplines. In order to secure an application, you have to be a good developer. In order to secure a network, you have to be a good administrator. To defend a service, you probably have to set it up a few times yourself.

It may not seem glamorous, but nobody becomes an elite hacker without a significant amount of troubleshooting, configuration, and digging through logs. To be the LeBron James of CCDC, you have to put in the reps.

While scripts are powerful, ensure that you know exactly what the script is doing and how it is doing it. While this will help you understand more, it also will save you a lot of pain and woe and misery and agony and writhing about and service downtime when the script does something unexpected.

>CCDC heavily rewards general knowledge (aka just "knowing things"). The competition environments vary so widely that it's almost impossible to guess what you'll encounter.
>
>Even if certain invitation environments are heavily recycled, it's likely that regionals and nats will be a whole different beast. It's important to be well versed in the security implications of various enterprise setups and OS versions.
{: .prompt-tip}

#### 3. Touch Grass

Go outside! Talk to someone! Remember that there is color in the world and that your problem is just a small pixel. Go for a run or to the gym. While there is so much to learn and a plethora of fun to be had, make sure to take care of your body! You'll perform much better and appreciate life. You don't have to be a cave gremlin.

## What next?

It's been an amazing school year and a great season. Working with the CCDC team has helped me find purpose and friends with similar interests.

Although I struggled with it at the beginning of the season, Windows has piqued my interest, particularly Active Directory and its network. I plan to set up an AD network over the summer, work on some certs, play some CTFs, and do some projects that you'll hopefully see on this blog.

## Resources
[Cal Poly's info sessions](https://cysec.team/bootcamps/): Really well rounded, good jump start for each role <br>
[BYU CCDC](https://byu-ccdc.github.io/): Check out the resources tab <br>
[Pwn.college Linux Luminarium](https://pwn.college/): Linux commands in depth <br>
[Hack the Box CJCA (paid, but only $8 a month for students)](https://academy.hackthebox.com/preview/certifications/htb-certified-junior-cybersecurity-associate): Covers all of the basics
